Oldest business in Richmond, I believe, has been
in business continuously. I think the oldest one
here is a lumber yard. It wasn't an old lumber
company.
That's Joe Clyde Westendorf, right? Yeah, well,
it started out, it was, Oh, I don't remember now
what the old original Wessendorf was here in that
lumber business, but his boy, Tony Wessendorf,
T.B., they called him, he took over back,
somewhere back in 1900 or so. He was operating it
before I started school. And Joe was his nephew,
wasn't he? Well, Joe's daddy, that's Joe Clyde's
daddy, was his nephew, Tony's nephew. Then it was
Joe Clyde. And Joe Clyde's granddaddy, who had an
insurance business here since way back before I
can remember. And Joe Clyde inherited that from
his granddaddy. Now, the Wessendorffs were some
of the original settlers of Richmond, right?
Well, they were pretty well, they were well fixed.
But there was, oh shucks, Bertrand, Winston,
Bassett, and so on down the line that had just all
kinds of land, cattle, and then farm cutting.
As long as 1919, right after the First World War,
cotton, the price of cotton just went way up, you
know. They made a big crop there. Everybody had
lots of money. But cotton has been the main
agricultural crop. Well... Then you came along
with oil. There was a mill here that sugarcane.
Across the bridge, you know, where the old Bill
Williams Cafe is out there. That big cafe just a
little past it all the way to Sugar Land used to be
solid sugarcane. And the Bertrand Farm sugarcane
then. But when the sugar cane business got to where
they couldn't get help, at that time, you could
rent convicts from the state. You had to have a
building to keep them in, and bars on the windows,
and so forth, and guards. But you could rent
convicts. I don't have any idea how cheap, but I
know they could rent them cheap, because the cane
farmers over there used them. I think cut that out.
Eventually, Sugar Land quit crushing cane. See,
these farmers and the state, the state prison
farmers, they didn't raise dogs like sugar cane.
After the cane went out, well, then of course they
went to cotton over there. The prairie farm went to
cotton, too. But I don't know. It just seemed like
the cotton farming, that is, these big farmers,
they just gradually went down.
There's more cotton farmers out on the prairie out
here in recent years than anywhere. You're
talking about oil. What is the booths on all of
them? They own most of the oil at Thompson or who
does? No, I wouldn't say. He said your oil. The
Moore family that I'm talking about, different
people here in Richmond had a lot of land. Now they
have sulfur and oil. And the Goobles is down at
Thompson. That's Burke Goobles and all of them?
That's his folks, his ancestors, his folks. And
Big Creek Oil Field, there's a lot of that. The A.P.
George family had a lot. They were big branches and
farmers. Big Creek Oil Field, practically all of
it was on Bud Davis' ranch, and he was a brother of
Mrs. A.P. George. Bud died while she inherited
that. But the big Greek oil field was a sort of a
minor operation for a good many years. They just,
oh, here in the last several years, they've
drilled wells out there and made lots of wells on
that Davis Ranch. OK, how did Miss Agnes Booth, you
know, like, there's, who, Who's her ancestors? Is
she a George way back? No, no.
Her husband had the money. She didn't have it. She
married money. Mr. Tom Booth had the money.
If our Booth estate is only two areas, then Mrs.
August Martin, Tom Booth, and Agnes were married
to Tom Booth. Because I knew, you know, that she
Well, Helen Ann Ragsdale's, you know, her
daughter-in-law. That's her daughter or her
daughter-in-law? It's her daughter. Daughter,
that's right. I guess it would be. Well, I know
Helen Ann's been married a few times. But anyway,
like, she, you know, she gets a lot of that money
from those estates, you know, her un-gas amount
that she was receiving. I couldn't believe it. But
speaking about oil, Mr. Blaze, have you worked in
the fields out here much? Thompson and Big Creek.
Yeah, I worked at Thompson, Big Creek, Blue Ridge,
and very little at Damon.
In fact, I was real well just about any of them up and
down the coast. That was when they had the Wooden
Derricks and the R.M.N., right? That's when I
started to have Wooden Derricks. Wooden derrick
was pretty handy on cold nights. Cold nights in
that derrick. Wooden derrick legs, all of that.
Come out about so far each way from the corner of the
derrick, you could back up in there and get out of
that
cold wind. Have you always been in the oil field?
Since you've been here in Richmond? Well... I
mean, most of the time. Practically most of the
time. I pulled around both filling stations once
and got out for a while.
The only way I've ever been able to make a living,
though, off of you. Yeah.
He liked it, that's the way it goes. Yeah, I know,
sir. I started rough-necking at that big creek. In
fact, the first job I ever had was to find a boiler.
Not a boiler, an A-boiler. A small one, at that. You
worked the boiler? You were, well, actually a
motorman, right? Huh? Farmer. Farmer? Oh. Well,
there was an old man by the name of Rich. He promoted
money to the River Wildcat down there across the
creek from Big Creek off me. And he got down, oh,
about 2,500 feet and had some six-inch casings set
and run out of money.
And he hired me to drive while he was rigged. So I was
out there laying around watching that rig. Wasn't
there a way for anybody to get in there and get him?
There ain't anyone that's walked.
So he got a little more money together. The driller
come out there with a dead man and two roughnecks.
Told me he was a father and mother of a mother's
wife. He said, Father Boyle, you had your driver
watching you, the farmer.
With a little instruction from some of these
roughnecks, I learned what to do to get some steam
up. So I was a farmer.
Fired with oil.
Yeah, that's where I started.
And then after he run out of money, then again, then
I went to work in the Gulf out there, roughly. Gulf
oil company? Mm-hmm. Who owns most of the wells
down there? Isn't it Humboldt? Or Walexone? In Big
Creek? Well, in Thompson and Big Creek. Well, in
Big Creek, the Gulf Company got practically
everything out there. Thompson and Gulf and
Humboldt.
How about Orchard, Joe? How about Orchard? Well,
Gulf got the biggest part of that. Sulphur, too?
Well, the... No, what's the name of that sulfur
company? The plant now is shut down. They're
getting all that sulfur out there in West Texas
now. But, oh, shucks, what's the name of that
sulfur company? Duval. Duval, yeah. When did they
start, you know, drilling down here at Thompson?
Thompson, they discovered, well, Thompson came
in in 1932.
But Big Creek, let's see, I believe in 1922, they
moved a little steam rig in there, which, of
course, at that time, this was a pretty good-sized
drilling rig. But they drilled a well there on top
of the dome, made a well that was 650 feet.
It never was a whole lot of producer, but then they
had to have oil to fire boil it with. And it amounted
to a good bit. They pumped it there for a long time,
the gasoline
engine. There. Oh, they just jumped here and there
and young of them. They make a well of caged linen,
make a dry hole, put a rug in it. But they have gotten
out here in the last, oh, eight, nine years or so,
and got off around 80. They don't make a lot of
wells. They're all pumping wells, but they're
old. On that T.W. Davis lease, there must be
isolated wells. There has been over 200
wells drilled on it, but they're not all produced.
They've got a good bit of production there on those
pumping wells.
Thompson Field. The golf company had that whole
thing back in that leased up, back in that bottom.
And they didn't think enough of it to drill a
wildcat. So they gave Cullen West half interest in
the whole work down there to drill a wildcat. And
they went back in there. They had to cut trees down,
build corduroy roads. And about the only way you
could get in there was on a cat or horseback. But
they made a well on the first hole, and they made a
well there. And then the Covington West finally
sold their half inches to the Humble Company.
That's the way the Humble Company got in there. It
wasn't Thompson, that was almost all black,
right? What? Blacks, Negroes, right? Wasn't
Thompson a lot of Negroes down there? Oh, yeah,
they were. There were a lot of people on the ranch
area and big places down there. Before that oil
field came in, there was, oh, sure, the majority of
the people were Negroes. However, there was one
old nugget down there, old Y.U. Jones, that was
worth a world of money. Y.U. Jones, is he still
alive? No. Because I know there's a Y.U. Jones that
I remember. That I know now. Okay, that's Y.U.
Jones that works it. Because I see him. But Y.U.
Jones, I don't think he ever got any money out of the
oil business except at least money. He was... were
practically cattlemen and nothing else. Can we go
back to agriculture? Yes, ma'am. In the early
1930s, they began to plant rice here. And they had a
hard time making a go of it. They had a good year,
fine, but, you know, some years weren't so good
because they depended on manual labor. And I know
that they really had a rough time of it the wives
worked in stores and they did lots of things to help
out to make things go then of course when it became
mechanical it became a major
agricultural activity in our county and they made
a lot of money but like rice and let's see cotton and
sugarcane but that's the only three things that
they grow they don't grow any soybeans or They've
never made a go with soybeans or corn? Well, they
just... Well, a little maize, right? Corn and
maize for their own use, primarily. They're
rarely going to maize and soybeans now. Right, but
they do. Primarily, your farmer planted cotton
for his income and grains for his own use and hay for
himself for his stock. Okay, going back to the
Negroes, most of them around here were were
former, well, descendants of former slaves,
right? And that's how they got most of their land,
like the ones over here on Thompson Highway? The
biggest part of them back in the day was a tenant
farm. The farming for white folks, that's the way
they got their crops in. But down around Thompson,
it's There's really been more cattle propagation
down there than back years ago. Old Boss Slavin,
Judy Hampton. Been to Booth, of course, on back
land back in there. Yeah, the old Herzog
plantation down there, too. The old Herzog place
down there, I think at times had been farmed a
little back in there. But it's up this side of
Thompson That's where we lived in 1913. I was a
baby. Have y'all lived in, I mean, y'all, where all
have y'all lived, you know, like since y'all got
married? Have y'all lived in Richmond? Richmond,
Rosenberg for a little, for about a year, not a
year, not quite a year. Just about a year. We've
lived here ever since. 44 years in Richmond. Not in
this house, right? Lived in it 38. Some years.
Let's see, 1941, 33 years last September.
And what all have you done? I mean, places like, as
your career, like if you just started, did you just
start working at Gulf Coast in 58 on tax
assessment? No. I started out with Houston
Lighting and Power Company after I finished high
school. Then I married. And we had stopped, and we
had three children. And then I went to work in the
courthouse, the tax collector. And then when the
war came along, I worked. I was chief clerk of the
draft board for five years. And then after the war
was over, but before the end of the draft office, I
quit and went back to the tax collector's office.
Okay, what changes did you notice, like, during
the war when, like, most of the men were away? Did
this community become more dependent on the, for
instance, like the women, did they take over the
stores and most of the businesses, or did, you
know, like, was it just most of the young men that
went? Most of the young men. Mostly young men. We
didn't have Well, of course, to begin with, your
age limit was 38, but you didn't draft them up to 38.
They could volunteer, but 26 was about as high as we
drafted, unless they had had deferments for some
reason or other which put them past that age. No,
there were enough men here to run things, and
then... Of course, a lot of people went to Houston
to work because of, well, they made parts for ships
and boilers for ships, and I don't know what all, in
Houston during the war. And a lot of people, that's
when they began commuting. But Richmond started
to grow right after the war, right? Yes, the whole
area started to grow. Okay. I wouldn't say right
after, because for a little while, it was hard to
get materials. But as soon as things became
available, yes, it began to grow. So I guess that
covers everything. You have anything else to say
or think of? Well, we've seen lots of changes.
paved streets when they used to be so muddy, you'd
get bogged down in Rosenberg, so sandy you'd get
stuck in the sand over here in Spots, and air
conditioning and all these things, and better
cars. We've seen a lot of things change. When they
got natural gas in here, they got running water,
hot water, and you see Richmond
Talk about these streets, Richmond sitting on
Sandy, this main part of town, where there's
nothing but sand. And the streets, when it was dry,
when the sand blew and the buggy wheels kind of
bogged up in that sand, So they went down on the
river and dug up a bunch of clay and all, and then put
clay on the streets to get out of the sand. Well,
then when it rained, it got snow and muddy. So then
they bought gravel and had it shipped in here and
graveled the streets with big old rocks, a lot of
it, like this. And then they'd get graveled up over
in Colorado County. And finally, then, to get away
from the rocks were the blacktop streets. That's
where we are now. We have a very active library here
now, a museum, I mean. And that little house
between the bridges down here, you know, your east
and westbound bridges? Yes, ma'am. The
handworks? That little antique shop? Well, it's
the handworks. It's for arts and crafts. and go
down and take courses in various arts and crafts
and some of them old. That was Carrie Nation's
daughter's home. Carrie Nation. Carrie Nation's
the woman with the axe that went around breaking up
the saloons. Yeah, yeah. Remember? That's her.
During Prohibition. Right. Was she from here? The
daughter lived here in that house, and Carrie
Nation spent much of her time with her in that
house. Where did she go around breaking? Wherever
there was a saloon. Was it here in Texas she broke up
the saloon? Not just Fort Bend County or Richmond,
but she went up north or anywhere and chopped up the
board with a hatchet. She was a character. Talking
about prohibition, was there a lot of bootlegging
and bathtub liquor and all that, bathtub gin that
went on right here? Joe can tell you more about that
than I. There wasn't much whiskey cooking in this
county as there was anywhere else in Texas, I
imagine.
I used to think the only way a farmer could live on a
booth estate and farm was to be able to cook good
whiskey.
Yeah, I had a filling station out here where Melvin
Lindeman's garage is. Yes, sir. And that catacomb
across the street over there was another filling
station. where that 66 is now, the Davis Park?
Davis Park. Where the Davis Park on that corner.
Yes, sir. In fact, the driveway of the filling
station was built up, was blocked up where that
water could run through there, you know. And I had a
sort of a shop there in the back of the station back
in, And then no mechanic in it or anything. I just
kept it more or less for storage or what have you.
But there was room enough to get four-file cars in
there. I went out there to open up one morning, and
there's Italians over there in the driveway over
at the other station. They hadn't opened up. These
guys had a modulated Ford truck, stake bed on it,
tarp on it. Well, I knew who it was. Running
whiskey, bringing whiskey from down there in the
bottom going to Houston.
And they wanted to, they traded over there. They
never did trade with me. And old Bert Ansel was
running that station. He come down in the morning
and wanted to store that truck, and he didn't have
any place for him to put it. So they come over, come
over to see me and want to know if I had room in that
storage out here. I had room in that storage. Well,
they might leave it a day, might leave it two or
three days. So... They took off. They drove a truck
in there and took off. I knew they had a load of
whiskey. I got up and looked under the tarp and see
what size kegs they had. Went down. My
brother-in-law was running a meat market down
there. I went down there and asked him if he had a
place to put some whiskey. when he just got a bunch
of, filled his barn up with cotton seed hulls over
there. And so we went down. It so happened there
wasn't very many new kegs in town.
And we got ahold of three kegs, took them out there
and filled them up with water and put them on that
truck. Took three of them kegs of whiskey off the
floor of that
cedar house. Come back here at noon, I saw them
dollar and a half store in the
truck. You know, I didn't know about that. I'm
learning things. Some of their customers, some of
their customers somewhere down the line, I
imagine, was a little unhappy. I imagine so.